---
title: Geometric Multigrid for high-order discretizations
author: Hari Sundar, Georg Stadler and George Biros
location: 16th Copper Mountain Conference on Multigrid Methods
link: http://grandmaster.colorado.edu/~copper/2013/
layout: talk
---
 
We focus on aymptotically optimal solvers for approximating the solution of elliptic partial differential equations (PDEs). For elliptic problems with low-order discretizations, the multigrid algorithm achieves this optimality, being linear ($\mathcal{O}(N)$) in the number of unknowns $N$. According to standard isoparametric polynomial approximation theory, 
the approximation error in the $L_2$-norm is bounded by,
\[
\|u-u_h\|_{L_2} \le Ch^{p+1}\|u\|_{H^{p+1}(\Omega)},
\]   
where $\|\cdot\|_{H^p}$ is the standard $H^p$ Sobolev norm, $\|\cdot\|_{L_2}$ is the $L_2$-norm, $u$ is the exact solution of the PDE, and $u_h$ is the solution of the $h$-discrete problem. Therefore, 
by using a finite element basis of at least degree $p$, we can achieve $\mathcal{O}(h^{p+1})$ convergence. This is the main motivation for the development of higher-order finite element methods for sufficiently smooth problems. Our goal is to develop a parallel geometric multigrid for solving systems arising from higher-order discretizations of variable-coefficient elliptic partial differential equations on arbitrary geometries using highly adapted meshes. Our method is designed for meshes that are built from an unstructured hexahedral macro mesh, in which each macro element is adaptively refined as an octree. This forest-of-octrees approach enables us to generate meshes for complex geometries with arbitrary levels of local refinement. We use geometric multigrid (GMG) for each of the octrees and algebraic multigrid (AMG) as the coarse grid solver. We designed our GMG sweeps to entirely avoid collectives, thus minimizing communication cost. Recently, we presented weak and strong scaling results for the 3D variable-coefficient Poisson problem using linear discretization that demonstrate high parallel scalability. The goal of this work is to explore various approaches for extending our geometric multigrid solver to support higher-order discretizations.   

For higher-order finite-element discretizations, the following approaches are commonly used, 

**Schwarz-based methods** This is the most common approach for solving systems arising from higher-order discretizations, which consists of local block solves and a coarse-grid solve. The main challenge with these approaches is they require solving dense local blocks with direct methods. Additionally, the coarse-grid solve can become fairly expensive and is not straightforward to achieve good parallel scalability. 

**$p$-multigrid** These methods are a direct extension of multigrid concepts to higher-order discretization. The usual approach has been to use coarse grids based on lower-order polynomials. Starting with fine grid with order-$p$ polynomial basis, the coarser grids correspond to polynomials of order $p/2, p/4,\ldots,1$, followed by geometric coarsening of the $p=1$ grid. The main shortcoming of this approach has been the dependence of the convergence factor on the order of the polynomial basis. 

**precondition using lower-order operator** This approach preconditions the higher-order operator using a lower-order operator obtained by overlaying the higher-order nodes with a lower-order (typically linear) finite element mesh. Multigrid is used to solve the lower-order operator. Although this approach is nearly independent of $p$, and is relatively straightforward to parallelize, it is not work optimal and the convergence factors are lower than multigrid applied directly to the higher-order operator.  

**direct** Directly apply multigrid to iteratively solve the linear systems that result from the higher-order discretizations. 

While considering large-scale elliptic PDEs the most popular approach appears to be to precondition using a lower-order operator. The advantages of doing this are mainly in the simplicity of the approach and the availability parallel multigrid solvers capable of solving such lower-order operators. The sparsity of the lower-order operators also permits the use of AMG for solving the lower-order operators, possibly obtained via discretizations on unstructured meshes. 
Although there are examples of using Algebraic Multigrid directly on operators resulting from higher-order discretizations, limited work has been done on using geometric multigrid with higher-order discretizations. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work on using geometric multigrid for solving systems arising from higher-order discretizations on arbitrary geometries using highly adapted meshes. 
In this work, we develop geometric multigrid methods to support higher-order discretizations ($1\le p\le 8$) and compare 
compare against preconditioning using the co-located linear operator. We evaluate using variable-coefficient Poisson problems on $2D$ and $3D$ domains. We demonstrate that by using appropriate inter-grid transfer operators and smoothers, mesh-independent convergence is possible ($1\le p\le8$) for the _direct_ approach. For the direct approach, best results are obtained using the symmetric successive overrelaxation (SSOR) smoother. We conclude with thoughts on the parallelization of the proposed approach.
